(MAINT) Document reference and value types for class-based DSC Resources (#113)
MicrosoftDocs/PowerShell-Docs-DSC: dsc/docs-conceptual/dsc-2.0/concepts/class-based-resources.md

is used instead. For more information on constructors for class-based DSC Resources, see
[Constructors][23].

Whether the property is a [reference type][07] or a [value type][06] determines the default value.
Reference types initialize to `$null`. Value types initialize to the value specified in their
definition.

Unlike other implementations, class-based DSC Resources manage all defined properties that have the
**DscProperty** attribute, even when you don't specify that property in a DSC Configuration or when
using `Invoke-DscResource`. Because value type properties have a non-null default value, there's no
way for a class-based DSC Resource to distinguish between a property that wasn't specified and one
that was specified as the default value.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> When you use a class-based DSC Resource, any value type properties you don't explicitly set are
> always set to their default value as defined in the DSC Resource.
>
> It isn't possible to use a class-based DSC Resource without managing every value type property
> defined for that DSC Resource. Unlike other DSC Resources, removing a property from your DSC

> > Configuration or from the call to `Invoke-DscResource` doesn't ignore that property's state. I

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Configuration or from the call to `Invoke-DscResource` doesn't ignore that property's state. It
```

> resets it to the default.
>
> Only reference type properties can be unmanaged for a class-based DSC Resource.

You can check whether a type is a reference or value type by inspecting its **BaseType**.

```powershell
function Test-IsValueType ($Object) {
    $base = $Object.GetType().BaseType
    while ($true) {
        switch ($base.FullName) {
            'System.Object' { return $false }
            'System.ValueType' { return $true }
            default {
                $base = $base.BaseType
            }
        }
    }
}

Test-IsValueType 'foo'
Test-IsValueType 5
```

```output
False
True
```

This table includes a few types commonly used in DSC Resources. It notes whether they're reference
or value types and, if they're value types, what their default value is when a DSC Resource is
initialized.

|                     Name                      |   Type    |        Default Value        |
| :-------------------------------------------- | :-------: | :-------------------------: |

> |               **System.String**               | Reference |           `$null`           |
> | **System.Management.Automation.PSCredential** | Reference |           `$null`           |
> |              **System.DateTime**              |   Value   | January 1, 0001 12:00:00 AM |
> |              **System.TimeSpan**              |   Value   |   All fields set to `0`.    |
> |                **System.Enum**                |   Value   |             `0`             |
> |               **System.Int32**                |   Value   |             `0`             |
> |               **System.Double**               |   Value   |             `0`             |

Reviewer: Reordered for readability and increasing complexity.
```suggestion
|                **System.Enum**                |   Value   |             `0`             |
|               **System.Int32**                |   Value   |             `0`             |
|               **System.Double**               |   Value   |             `0`             |
|              **System.DateTime**              |   Value   | January 1, 0001 12:00:00 AM |
|              **System.TimeSpan**              |   Value   |   All fields set to `0`.    |
|               **System.String**               | Reference |           `$null`           |
| **System.Management.Automation.PSCredential** | Reference |           `$null`           |
```

> the rest of the DSC Resource's logic to work. If the DSC Resource creates a file at that location,
> don't validate its existence on the property declaration.

If you're using any [complex properties][22], be sure to apply validation attributes to those
subproperties as well. Those subproperties are validated at the same time as their parent property.

### Use enums instead of ValidateSet

If a property of the class-based DSC Resource has a list of valid values it accepts, define it as an
[enum property][24] instead of using the **ValidateSet** attribute.

This gives users a better error message and makes maintenance easier if you use those values
anywhere else in your module. Instead of having to update every cmdlet or check for that property,
you can update the enum definition.

Remember that enums are value type properties. They default to `0` when an instance of the
class-based DSC Resource is created. If you set an explicit default value for an enum property, that

> enum can't be unmanaged. If a user doesn't specify the property, the DSC Resource will behave the
> same as if the user had explicitly specified the default value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
enum can't be unmanaged. If a user doesn't specify the property, the DSC Resource behaves the
same as if the user had explicitly specified the default value.
```

To support unmanaged enum properties, make sure not to define a label for the `0` value. By default,
if you don't specify the integer value for any labels when using the `enum` statement, the first
declared label has a value of `0`. Instead, define the first label with a value of `1` (or any
higher value).

For example:

```powershell
enum OptionalSetting {
    FirstOption = 1
    SecondOption
    ThirdOption
}
```

> Then, in your **Test** and **Set** methods, you can ignore the enum property if the value is `0`.
> In **Test**, if the enum property is `0`, ignore the current state of the DSC Resource on the
> system. Don't report the DSC Resource as out of desired state if the current state is a valid value.
> In **Set**, make sure your logic for modifying system state ignores the enum property if it's `0`.

Reviewer: Let change method names to use code markup throughout. This is one example. I didn't look for others.

```suggestion
Then, in your `Test()` and `Set()` methods, you can ignore the enum property if the value is `0`.
In `Test()`, if the enum property is `0`, ignore the current state of the DSC Resource on the
system. Don't report the DSC Resource as out of desired state if the current state is a valid value.
In `Set()`, make sure your logic for modifying system state ignores the enum property if it's `0`.
```

> [!NOTE]
> This method for implementing enum properties that can be unmanaged only works when the underlying
> value of the enum labels doesn't matter or when `0` isn't a valid underlying value.

### Explicitly define default values for value type properties

When authoring a class-based DSC Resource, ensure that your properties specify correct default
values for every value type property. You'll need to ensure your default values stay in sync with
those of the component your DSC Resource manages.

Document the behavior of these properties for your users. Make sure that your documentation explains

> that these properties will be set to their default value if the user doesn't specify them when using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that these properties are set to their default values if the user doesn't specify them when using
```

the DSC Resource.

### Ensure the DSC Resource respects unmanaged reference type properties

Because reference type properties initialize to `$null`, unlike value type properties, a DSC
Resource can distinguish between whether a reference type property was specified or not. Make sure
that your DSC Resources ignore unmanaged reference type properties in the **Test** and **Set**
methods.

In **Test**, if the reference type property is `$null`, ignore the current state of the DSC Resource
on the system. Don't report the DSC Resource as out of desired state if the current state isn't

> `$null`.

Reviewer: The double negatives here are confusing. Did you mean to say: "if the current state IS $null"?

Author: No. Normally, if the current state and desired state don't match, you would return `$false` and consider that the system is out of the desired state.

If a reference value property is `$null`, the user did not explicitly choose to manage it. In that case, treat the property as being in the desired state regardless of the value for that property in the current state. In this case, a non-null value in the current state doesn't indicate a Test method failure because the user did not specify how to manage the property.

Resource easier. It also makes your DSC Resource's methods easier to read and understand.

<!-- Reference Links -->
[01]: ../how-tos/resources/authoring/checklist.md

> [02]: /dotnet/api/system.management.automation.dscpropertyattribute

Reviewer: Looks like you used my new script. Nice!

Author: It worked really well!
